Visvesvaraya National Institute of Technology (VNIT), formerly Visvesvaraya Regional College of Engineering, Nagpur (VRCE), is a public engineering and research institution in Nagpur, Maharashtra, in central India.[3] It was established in June 1960 by the Government of India and later named in honor of engineer, planner and statesman Sir M. Visvesvaraya. 
The Institute awards Bachelor's, Master's and Doctoral degrees in engineering, technology and architecture, for which the entry is through the Joint Entrance Examination – Mains and Graduate Aptitude Test in Engineering. 
Unknown to many, the prestigious institute's history can be traced back to 1947, when the Architecture Department was established by Madhya Pradesh Government.

In accordance with the second five-year plan (1956–60) in India, a number of industrial projects were contemplated. The Regional Engineering Colleges (RECs) were established by the central government to mimic the IITs at a regional level and act as benchmarks for the other colleges in that state. For the Western region in the year of 1960, the Institute was established under the name Visvesvaraya Regional College of Engineering (VRCE). It was established under the scheme sponsored by Govt. of India and Govt. of Maharashtra. The college was started in June 1960 by amalgamating the State Govt. Engineering College functioning at Nagpur since July 1956. In the meeting held in October 1962, the Governing Board of the College resolved to name it after the eminent engineer, planner, and statesman of the country Sir M.Visvesvaraya.

The prime objective of establishing Regional Engineering Colleges was to impart quality technical education throughout the country and foster national integration. The College started functioning in 1960 from camp office in the premises of Govt. Polytechnic, Sadar, Nagpur and subsequently an area of about 214 acres was acquired to house an independent Regional Engineering College at present location. 
Academic programs

Undergraduate programs are offered in Architecture (B.Arch) and eight engineering (B.Tech) disciplines:

    Chemical Engineering
    Civil Engineering
    Computer Science and Engineering
    Electrical and Electronics Engineering
    Electronics and Communications Engineering
    Mechanical Engineering
    Metallurgical and Materials Engineering
    Mining Engineering

The Engineering undergraduate programs are usually four years, while Architecture is a five-year program. The institute accepts an incoming freshman class of up to 798 students.[5]

Graduate and research programs leading to Master's (M.Arch, M.Sc. and M.Tech) and Ph.D. degrees, are offered by the Architecture department, as well as all basic science departments and all eight engineering departments. A range of special fields of study are available in graduate and research programs in each discipline. The institute will soon offer Aeronautical Engineering. Up to 350 students are admitted to the Master's program each year.[6][7]

The institute uses relative grading on a 10-point scale.

